---
title: "The 6-12-4 Rule aka \"Krithi's Law\""
layout: postx
category: codework
---

We all understand the need for *crunch times*, the last sprint to the finish line, the overnight launch rooms, drawn-out on-call or LSE calls. Having said that, the best way to burn out a team and make individuals wonder if the grass is greener (or the hours shorter) somewhere else is to sustain these periods. Long hours, especially over an extended period, should be the exception in all cases – no team should be planning 60-hour weeks ahead of time.

Peer pressure will often feed into a team working long hours, with team members thinking "*I don't want to let the team down*", or "*those folks are working 20 hours, I can't work less than them*". Usually this is self-driven, but there are teams where leaders will model extreme working hours, or actually reward those that work the longest hours. Either behavior makes the rest of the team feel the need to do the same.

The personal pressure of working in this way has a secondary effect; even if the individual is not stressed out by the hours, the work can affect personal and family relationships and introduce additional stress. This kind of stress is rarely something the individual will want to share with the team, yet has a legitimate and disproportional effect on their overall wellbeing.

Down time is important, but it's sometimes hard to shed the stress before you can relax or sleep, so grabbing an hour here or there isn't always useful. Plan to get away, disconnect, and have time to actually relax.

Remember, this isn't just about being tired, about the fact that tired people make mistakes, or that tired people aren't going to be happy people. It's seriously about physical and mental health. If you need convincing, try some of the evidence [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6617405/), [here](https://hbr.org/2015/08/the-research-is-clear-long-hours-backfire-for-people-and-for-companies), [here](https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/322595), [here](https://theconversation.com/go-home-on-time-working-long-hours-increases-your-chance-of-having-a-stroke-119388), [here](https://www.lifehack.org/articles/productivity/10-reasons-you-should-stop-working-long-hours-today.html),and [here](https://www.healthline.com/health/working-too-much-health-effects).

## The Rule

To address this possibility the Principal Engineers supporting the [Luxury Stores](https://www.amazon.com/luxurystores) launch instigated the 6-12-4 rule and enforced it during the 3 days following the launch as a number of CX and catalog issues were tracked down. This rule is intended to ensure all team members are not expected to work beyond a reasonable capacity. It also helps the team keep an eye on each other and make sure that they are all getting the rest they need.

The rule is pretty simple:

> No team member will be asked to work **more than 6 days** in a row or **more than 12 hours** in a row, and when they are offline it must be **no less than 4 hours.** These are *non-negotiable* extreme *upper limits* of work time we ever ask from an employee. Teams should *rarely* hit these limits which may never be considered sustainable or permanent.


As we would expect there to be a PE involved in major events, either as part of the team or supporting, you can expect that they will be looking to enforce this rule. It is also acceptable for any member of the team that feels under pressure to work outside of these constraints to reach out to the PE for support. We **will** make tough decisions that may put work aside, or delay actions to prioritize individual and team health. 

While the rule above allows for a maximum of 72 hours in a 7 day period, this is not a planning tool, if you have leaders starting to plan ahead based on this as an expectation **escalate** now. The rule does not state how many of these weeks you can work in a row because this rule is covering exceptional situations, if you move into a second week of working like this you have a way bigger problem!

 

## Mechanisms

1. If this is a planned event such as a launch make sure to plan **shifts** to ensure people have known start and end times. One practice is to use your max time (and just because we allow 12, 10 is always better) and have either a 30 or 60 minute hand-over built in.
11. If you don't have enough people to cover the time with reasonable shifts, you probably aren't staffed for what you are trying to accomplish!
1. Schedule regular check-in calls to make sure people are following the shift plan. You may already have calls setup for status updates, just add a quick roll-call to those.
1. Call out those who are helping their team mates; it doesn't have to be a big deal, but make sure the team knows that you value the behavior.
1. Assign "mentors" to do more informal check-ins. Perhaps have PEs, or other leaders, each take a list of folks that each of them keeps an eye on.
1. Ensure those team members that are away turn Chime/Slack to DnD, and set a really high bar for any need to page them back in. If you can, have them turn pagers off.

 
